Angie Jones is a software engineer and automation architect who specializes in software testing and development. Jones has contributed to several open-source testing tools and libraries, including Selenium and Appium.


== Early life and education ==
Angie Jones was born in New Orleans, Louisiana. She attended Marion Abramson Senior High School in New Orleans, LA. After graduating from high school, she enrolled as a Business major at Tennessee State University. However, after taking an introductory C++ course which sparked her interest in tech, she changed her major to Computer Science. She has a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science from Tennessee State University. In 2010, she obtained a Master's Degree in Computer Science from North Carolina State University


== Career ==
Angie Jones began her career in 2003 at IBM in Research Triangle Park, North Carolina as a software engineer for 9 years. In 2007, Jones became the CEO of Diva Chix, an online fashion game "where teenage girls and women acquire skills in technology, entrepreneurship, leadership and participate in fashion competitions". The game is still active and Jones remains the CEO and sole developer.
She became an adjunct professor at Durham Technical Community College in 2014 where she taught Java programming courses until 2017. She worked with LexisNexis as a Consulting Automation Engineer in 2015. In 2016, she began speaking at software conferences globally and became an international keynote speaker in 2017.
In 2017, she joined Twitter as a Senior Automation Engineer. In 2018, Jones joined Applitools, an AI-powered visual testing and monitoring platform, to start their Developer Relations initiative. As part of her role at Applitools, she created Test Automation University, an online platform for programming and test automation subjects taught by herself and other experts.
In 2021, she joined Block as the Head of Developer Relations for their open source decentralized exchange platform, TBD54566975. Jones holds 26 patented inventions in the United States of America and China.
Jones has authored chapters in multiple software engineering books including The Digital Quality Handbook: Guide for Achieving Continuous Quality in a DevOps Reality, DevOps: Implementing Cultural Change, and 97 Things Every Java Programmer Should Know.


== Volunteering ==
Jones volunteers with Black Girls Code, where she led the Raleigh-Durham Chapter from 2015-2017. Jones also volunteered with TechGirlz where she planned and taught technology workshops for middle-school girls from 2015-2017. Jones is an active member of Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority


== References ==