Leonardo Torres Quevedo (Spanish: [leoˈnaɾðo ˈtores keˈβeðo]; 28 December 1852 – 18 December 1936) was a Spanish civil engineer, mathematician, and inventor 
of the late 19th century and early 20th century. A member of the Royal Spanish Academy since 1920, he was also a corresponding member of the French Academy of Sciences, among other institutions. Torres was a prolific and versatile innovator in various fields of engineering, including mechanics, aeronautics and automatics. One of his greatest achievements was El Ajedrecista (The Chess Player) of 1912, an electromagnetic device capable of playing a limited form of chess that demonstrated the capability of machines to be programmed to follow specified rules (heuristics) and marked the beginnings of research into the development of artificial intelligence.
His first major project was the patent for a new cable car system in 1887 to transport people safely, an area that culminated in 1916 with the Whirlpool Aero Car located in Niagara Falls, that carries 35 standing passengers over a one-kilometre trip. In between, he published Sur les machines algébriques (1895) and Machines à calculer (1901), technical works that gave him a notorious reputation in France, carrying out the construction of several analog machines for the resolution of algebraic equations.
From 1902 to 1911, Torres made significant aeronautical contributions, most notably a mooring post with a superior pivoting platform to be able to moor a dirigible outdoors, and the Astra-Torres airship, a trilobed cross section structure that was widely used by the Allied Powers during World War I. He was also a key figure in the development of radio control in 1901 with the Telekine, which he created modern wireless remote-control operation principles.
Torres' pioneering advances included the designs for a special-purpose electromechanical calculator in his 1914 paper Essays on Automatics, which has been qualified by British historian Brian Randell as "a fascinating work which well repays reading even today", where he also proposed an early form of floating point values and automata with discernment capacity. He successfully demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine by producing a typewriter-controlled calculating machine in 1920.
He continued conceiving original designs until his retirement in 1930, especially in naval engineering, such as the Camp-Vessel (a dirigible-carrying boat), and the Binave (a multihull steel ship). In addition to his inventing work, Torres also stood out in the field of letters, and was a noted speaker and supporter of Esperanto.