Lisa Gelobter (born 1971) is a computer scientist, technologist and chief executive. She was the Chief Digital Service Officer for the United States Department of Education.
In 2016, Gelobter founded and took on the role of Chief Executive Officer of tEQuitable, a start-up that provides an independent and confidential platform to address issues of bias, harassment, and discrimination in the workplace. She raised more than $2 million for tEQuitable, becoming one of the only thirty-four Black women to ever raise $1 million or more in venture capital.


== Personal life ==
Her father was a Polish Jew, and her mother was Afro-Caribbean. She graduated from Brown University in 2011 with a computer science degree with a concentration in artificial intelligence and machine learning.


== Career ==
In her early career, Gelobter was the Director of Program Management at Macromedia. During her time there, she invented Shockwave, a multimedia platform that laid the foundation for the modern web. After that she held several executive level positions at companies like The Feedroom, Comet Systems, Brightcove, Joost Technologies, and NBC Universal, which lead to her senior management position for the launch of Hulu. From there Gelobter spent several years as the Chief Digital Officer for BET Networks.
Gelobter served as Chief Digital Service Officer for the United States Department of Education during the Presidency of Barack Obama. In this position, she helped to improve HealthCare.gov, reducing the number of individual pages and overall application time. She led the team that built the College Scorecard, an online tool for comparing the cost and value of higher education institutions in the United States. This program helped raise the country’s college graduation rates by 1.5%.
In 2016, Gelobter founded tEquitable, an independent, confidential platform to address issues of bias, discrimination and harassment in the workplace. She raised more than $2 million for the platform.
She is also a former member of the New York Urban League STEM Advisory Board  and was named one of Fast Company’s Most Creative People.


== Honors and awards ==
In 2019, her and her business tEQuitable are recognized in Inc.'s 100 Women Building America's Most Innovative and Ambitious Businesses.
In January 2016, she is recognized as one of the Most Creative People in Business by Fast Company.
In March 2014, she is honored by an article in The Roots called "17 Black Women in Science and Tech You Should Know".
In November 2011 she was recognized in The Roots' article "Blacks in Silicone Valley".


== References ==