Ujjwal Maulik is an Indian computer scientist and a professor. He is the former chair of the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at Jadavpur University, Kolkata, West Bengal, India. He also held the position of the principal-in-charge and the head of the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at Kalyani Government Engineering College.


== Education ==
He did his schooling from Nabadwip Bakultala High School, Nabadwip, Nadia and Ramakrishna Mission Vivekananda Centenary College, Rahara, 24 Parganas (North) both in West Bengal.  Subsequently, he completed B.Sc. in Physics and B. Tech. in Computer Science from University of Calcutta, Kolkata, West Bengal, India in 1986 and 1989.  He also received his M. Tech. in Computer Science and Ph.D. in Engineering in 1992 and 1997 at Jadavpur University, Kolkata, West Bengal, India. He did post-doctoral research at the University of New South Wales, Australia in 1999 and the University of Texas, Arlington, U.S. in 2001.


== Research and other activities ==
Maulik and his research group have contributed towards the development of science and engineering especially in the areas of AI in Health Care, Bioinformatics, intelligent transport system, supervised and unsupervised machine learning, and Social and Biological Networks.
As an Alexander von Humboldt Experienced Researcher, he has worked at the German Cancer Research Center and Ruprecht Karl University of Heidelberg, Germany in 2010, 2011, and 2012. He was a senior associate of the International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP), Italy from 2012 to 2018.
He has also worked in Viswa Bharati University, India, Los Alamos National laboratory, USA, University of Maryland at Baltimore County, USA, Heidelberg University, Germany, Tsinghua University, China, Sapienza University of Rome, Italy, University of Padova, Italy, Grenoble Institute of Technology, France, University of Warsaw, Poland, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia.
He is the Fellow of the  West Bengal Academy of Science and Technology, Indian National Academy of Engineering (INAE), National Academy Sciences India (NASI), the International Association for Pattern Recognition (IAPR), and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). He is also a Distinguish member of ACM. He is also a Distinguish Speaker of ACM and Distinguish Lecturer of IEEE CIS.
His research interests include data science, machine learning, bioinformatics, and the Internet of things. In these areas he has published twelve books.


=== Book ===
Quantum Inspired Meta-heuristic for Image Analysis, Wiley, UK, 2019 
Soft Computing - Application to Image and Multimedia Data, Springer, Germany, 2013 
Multiobjective Genetic Algorithms for Clustering: Applications in Data Mining and Bioinformatics, Springer, Germany, 2011 


== Awards and recognition ==
Fellow, Asia-Pacific Artificial Intelligence Association (AAIA), Hong Kong, 2022.
Distinguish Speaker, IEEE CIS, 2022
Distinguish Member, ACM, 2021
Elected Fellow, National Academy Sciences India (NASI), 2021
Siksharatna Award, Government of West Bengal, 2021
ACM Distinguish Speaker, 2021 
Elected Fellow, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE),2020 
Elected Fellow, International Association of Pattern Recognition (FIAPR), USA, 2018 
Elected Fellow, Indian National Academy of Engineering (FNAE),  India, 2014 
Senior Associate, International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP), 2012–2018.
Alexander von Humboldt Fellowship, 2010, 2011 and 2012


== References ==


== External links ==
Prof. Ujjwal Maulik
Ujjwal Maulik
Ujjwal Maulik: H-index & Awards - Academic Profile
ORCID